I'm Olaf okay and I would like to talk
about artists and hacker as hackers and
hackers as artists and I'll do that from
a very very personal vantage point of my
own practice dealing a lot with notions
of identity and presence and also talk
about it in the context of art hack day
which is an event I organize that brings
together artists and hackers to create a
flash exhibit so while we get set up
just a couple of things on the topic of
art and hacking because there's so much
to be said right just a couple of things
I won't talk about I won't talk about
the genesis of the word hacking I won't
talk about the railroad club at MIT I
won't talk about Eric Raymond seminal
book the cathedral and the bazaar which
deals a lot with the reputation economy
in hacking and why hacking and open
source works the way it works I'm not
going to talk about Paul grams book
hackers and painters Paul Graham being
now a very well-known VC who started as
a technologist his book being kind of
one of the main sources whereby a lot of
technologists today discover that
technology is very very closely related
to art and lastly I won't talk about the
kind of or blema size the recent trend
in the wake of Snowden or Julian Assange
whereby artists rebrand themselves as
hackers what i will do though is just
share a very personal story of how i got
started with my own practice and then
talk a little bit about art hack day and
what I think that means for kind of art
artistic productive technology can learn
from each other so very very briefly
about how I got started with my own
practice and I'll share excited four and
a half years ago and the very genesis of
this performance started at CES I don't
know if you know what CS is but it's the
biggest consumer electronics show in the
world it took place and it takes place
in Vegas and it's literally incredible
in that you cannot believe that that
thing actually happens you still have
roughly a hundred thousand middle-aged
man who all descend into the same
conference center to check out the
latest consumer electronics half of
which never reach market but it's really
interesting in that you see a lot of
crazy stuff as I mentioned part of it
never reaches the market and
the things when i was there four and a
half years ago was that i saw this thing
which is in any bot and it's kind of a
remote presence robot i'm sure it looks
much cooler now than it did back then
but back then it was the newest thing i
knew existed so i wanted an investigated
this thing closely because i'm really
into notions of identity and remote
presence and I was kind of shocked at
this device and how expensive it was and
in my mind how incredibly
over-engineered it was so if you look at
it it's on two wheels but somehow it
stands upright so some incredible
mechanical engineering and probably
computer science went into making this
thing actually work and I was just like
why wouldn't you just take a
remote-controlled car an iPad which had
just come out back then and put it on
the remote controlled car and there you
have your remote presence robot for you
know five hundred bucks instead of
15,000 which is what these any bots went
for so I was really really proud of this
what I perceived as you know my stroke
of genius and I went and spoke to it
about it to a German artist friend who
was really into biohacking and he was
less convinced about the artistic merit
of that probably on very fair grounds
and since he was big into biohacking he
was like you know what I think you
should just deal with rats do lab rats
and use an iPhone and graft iPhones into
the rats eyes that's a great remote
presence robot and I was like this is
dis topic beyond belief but I still
thought the idea had some merit the
problem of course with his proposal was
that it would take absolutely forever to
complete to actually grab these iphones
into the right size so instead I took
out my what then was an iphone 3 which
was actually kind of an old iphone even
back then and drew this very very simple
sketch for my version of a remote
presence robot where I thought that I
would simply use this notion take his
idea of having iPhones his eyes replace
my eyes by the iphones and have other
people dial in and kind of take over me
as a person as i walked around and i
would do something to kind of like dress
this up as a mask or something like that
so i did this really ugly sketch and
showed it to
a couple of couple of artists friends
and you know technologists friends and
everyone was unanimous that it was an
absolutely terrible idea so I paused on
it for a little bit and then a couple of
months later I found myself at a
different conference again for work
South by Southwest and if you've ever
been you might have found yourself kind
of under stimulated on board and I kind
of got a little bit bored during the
conference so I decided hey I'm just
going to do this and see how it works
out so I went to a bunch of dollar
stores and started to try to kind of
figure out how I could create this
remote presence robot and starts to try
on waste baskets for structural support
so I tried on one then a different one
different texture here as you can see i
also tried lampshades and unfortunately
it was really hard to take pictures with
your phone and get the right focus so I
managed actually to find someone else
who would take put on baskets on his
head for me to see what it would look
like and we tried on various different
kinds of baskets just to get proper
structural support and finally I found
the right basket and started to assemble
this and this is what my remote presence
robot finally turned out as when I had
people dialing in to it and here I'm
just walking around itself by Southwest
doing you know what I was supposed to do
for work with people dialing in to my
eyes and seeing what I see but obviously
being unable to kind of control me we
also did another version of this whereby
since the Wi-Fi connection was flaky at
some points we actually changed to front
facing camera recording just as a
different experiment which created an
entirely different set of social
reactions to it so that was kind of a
very very quick social exploration and
in remote in remote presence and and the
reception for this was incredibly warm
which is always a little bit of a coin
toss when you do something where you
cover your face whether people are going
to be freaked out or where they're good
they're going to approach you in this
case everyone was was approaching me and
kind of the most common question was you
know why are you doing this what kind of
cause are you advancing and since there
was it South by Southwest people also
asked which brand is this for which I
thought was both flattering and
terrifying at the same at the same time
so to me anyhow I had just done it
obviously to kind of spur a reflection
around remote presence and kind of just
a little bit be brt about it yeah and
when I did my afterwards when I kind of
consolidated this is kind of just a
quick speed project or you know a hack
or an artistic experiment I kind of just
did a time budget to figure out how much
time did this actually take to do and
when I did it it dawned upon me that I'd
spent less than 24 hours and to end from
idea generation to actually doing the
performance and as you can see a lot
part of the time was actually spent
finding the right the right waste basket
as structural structural support turned
into the trickiest thing and and it
dawned upon me then that this was
actually a lot like a hackathon except
that I kind of done it on my own and it
would be really nice to do this with
other people now of course back then and
still today hacking in hackathons are
kind of under assault conceptually by a
lot of different parties both in kind of
art critique is kind of a very
capitalist mode of production and then
on the corporate side where by corporate
interests have kind of taken over the
original notion of hacking and kind of
subverted it into you know a recruiting
event that's highly competitive and
filled with prizes other than just being
about you know the joy of creation and
kind of subverting a system this picture
being from Facebook's old campus just to
exemplify the kind of corruption that
that the word has faced which I think
it's actually always faced ever since
it's in since inception so with a couple
of other artists and hackers we bend it
together and said hey would be really
nice to do something like this together
to kind of try to reinstate the original
meaning of the word hacking if such
meaning ever existed we started this
event called art hack day where we get
together a bunch of hackers whose medium
is art and art
who's medium is tech and we create an
exhibit together in 48 hours in an art
space from scratch and this exhibit
always has a theme that's both
artistically politically and
technologically relevant so the last
theme on the top of the list was
delusions and technologists actually can
have anything to say with regards to
with regards to climate change which
will see towards the end is definitely
the case and this exhibit just lasts one
evening which kind of removes a lot of
the pressure around you know creating
something awesome i hope my prior like
art had kind of lowered the bar of your
expectations of what would well we come
out and and also kind of removes a lot
of the the potential competitiveness
that that can exist so when we do our
hack days we do it for kind of two
reasons because there are two core
notions that we really want to champion
and two core notions that we think are
like really at the intersection of art
and technology and they're the notions
of radical collaboration and the notion
of expressiveness and I'd like to dive
into these two notions and show you a
couple of artworks that have come out of
art hack day that really embody these
two notions so firstly I think arguably
radical collaboration is something
that's very very core to technology and
open source open source being a
reputation economy that's kind of you
know arguably blissfully outside of the
real world economy which just breeds an
entirely different level of
collaboration and then of course what
art to a large extent brings to
technology is expressiveness in a much
deeper sense than we typically have when
we talk about expressiveness and
technology so firstly let's just talk a
little bit about radical collaboration
and in the context of hackery bringing
it to art and in the context of art hack
day so obviously in an art hack day
people come together who might not ever
have worked together so that's in one
way as the type of radical collaboration
you get but you also get it in the kind
of pure hacking sense where authorship
can be incredibly hard to determine
just because so many people have
contributed to work at one moment in
time and furthermore this notion
stretches even further out because it's
even collaborating with the audience in
a very very deep sense where the
audience might not just be participating
in the artwork but where the audience
might actually be putting themselves at
risk so show you an example of one of
these artworks a kind of embody radical
collaboration and where the audience
puts itself at risk and that's a work I
did with shampoo earth and Dean hunt
when we were just starting to work
together called pantheon and pantheon is
a Chrome extension that lets you swap
your online identity with other people
who also have that same extension so
it's actually an incredibly scary
extension because as you use it and as
you live this artwork as an audience you
are taking the online identity of
someone else and someone else is also
taking your identity the way this piece
works and it's a little bit hard to show
as a slideshow but every time you open a
new tab you will open it as another
person who also has the chrome extension
so you might open it in this case logged
in to someone else you know personal
information on their account this
account just happens to be the new york
times or you might log into actually
their online bank or their facebook
account and this works by a cookie
sharing which is kind of the fundamental
infrastructure of the web so while you
have kind of complete control over
someone else's online identity someone
else who also has the extension has
control over your online identity so
it's a very very weird game of like cat
and mouse that engages the audience and
this like collaborative sense very very
deeply and this was for the art hack day
that was themed godmode so obviously
here you kind of threw the extension you
get god mode over someone else's
identity for a brief for a brief moment
of time so it's a very kind of like
bizarre reflection on on power and the
other work i just like to share with
regards to the radical collaboration in
the context of art hack day and was and
the world's first digital artist auction
so this was a work that we could
probably like ten people over all
involved in the complete production of
this performance
it was what happened was that for
digital artists sold their Facebook
profiles in an online auction to the
highest bidder so if you aren't aware of
this there's actually a giant black
market online where people try to
acquire fake identities for various
purposes both legitimate and non
legitimate and is kind of a pun on both
the fact that it's really hard to make a
living as an artist because the art
economy is very dire and the fact that
they're all these companies that are
actually making money off of our digital
identities we did a performance whereby
these well actually five artists sold
their identities online so not only was
it a group of people who had never
worked together that came together to
collaborate but also was like deeply
collaborative in the sense they were
actually giving up part of their
identities to the audience that then
bought about their profiles so that's a
little bit on the notion of radical
collaboration and how that can get
created and it's like very very
constrained as circumstance that is art
acting so to kind of round off and talk
a little bit about expressiveness which
obviously is kind of what art rings to
hackery in a much deeper sense and I
think most hackers would admit typically
when we talk about expressiveness and
technology or in programming right it's
in this almost esoteric sense of a
programming language being beautiful or
very expressive or mathematics being
very concise hero Euler's identity and
expressive but in my mind that's a very
kind of like esoteric notion of
expressiveness in technology and of
course in the context of this conference
and this audience we all use technology
as a real tool to express ourselves so
it's also if you think about how
technology is often taught that's taught
in a very utilitarian way there there's
always kind of a utilitarian end goal
that isn't always related to just to
just expressing ourselves as humans so
an example of an artwork that really
really embodies the expressiveness of
technology is this piece called iconic
lashes which came from the god mode
themed art hack day and this was
actually on really too radical
collaboration to
three people who had never worked
together graphic designer artist Clement
valla photographer eric berg lean and
the programmer jonathan dan who came
together and made these algorithmic
mashups of iconography from the met and
called it iconic lashes and use
technology to kind of create these new
artifacts that in a way kind of comment
on our shared shared human heritage so
that's one of them and then another
iconic lesh kind of would want someone
to 3d print these of 3d printers ever
get that good and and to round up on the
on the expressiveness and using
technology to express something I
mentioned the last theme was a delusion
tada and of climate change and I
personally was very skeptical whether
anything would come out of the theme on
climate change with regards to art in
technology because you can kind of feel
powerless both as an artist and as an
hacker dealing with such a problem of
the Commons and this was a very clever
clever work that came out of it and
which was called the IPCC by tiger brain
and she worked with Sam Levine on this
work where they took the IPCC report
which is basically a summary of the
scientific knowledge on political
consensus quote-unquote on climate
change and replace the word climate
change by capitalism in all of the
reports and in the videos as well and
printed it out and exhibited it and
obviously it just generated a ton of
puns as you can see our mitigation of
capitalism on the Intergovernmental
Panel on capitalism which also reads
actually if you read it as one of the
most cogent critiques of capitalism
incidentally that you could that you
could you could think of and to round up
because actually the IPCC got the Nobel
Prize for its work on on climate change
in 2007 so kind of a golden comment from
there was action is necessary now before
capitalism moves beyond man control it's
obviously in the original was climate
change and just highlights how clever
the commentary is on you know climate
change being this problem of the column
and yeah how capitalism is kind of the
underlying problem of climate change
that's hard to address so with that I'd
round up on the notion of artists as
hackers thank you
you